                              Table of Contents

    1. How to test the gateway works
    2. Statistics
    3. The log file


1. How to test that the gateway is working

Telnet to the host running the gateway at the port number
that you used during installation, and press RETURN.

Example:

telnet gopher.upenn.edu 70

You should see output like this:

0About this Internet Gopher	Goph-TI-Gateway	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
1About PennInfo	M penninfo-srv.upenn.edu 9000 836	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
1About the University of Pennsylvania	M penninfo-srv.upenn.edu 9000 852	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
1What's New on PennInfo	M penninfo-srv.upenn.edu 9000 1627	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
7Keyword search all nodes at this TechInfo server	K penninfo-srv.upenn.edu 9000 	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
7Keyword search the items in this menu	K penninfo-srv.upenn.edu 9000 0	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
1World Wide TechInfo	worldwide-techinfo	lam.dccs.upenn.edu	70
1World Wide Gopher	1/Other Gopher and Information Servers	gopher.tc.umn.edu	70

.
Connection closed by foreign host.

Specifically, look for these things
    1) "About this Internet Gopher"
    2) the main menu of the local Techinfo server
    3) keyword search items
    4) World wide techinfo
    5) World wide gopher
    6) the last line has just a period on it

If you don't get this output, read the DEBUGLOG file to see
if there's a message that indicates the problem.  If the
DEBUGLOG doesn't exist, then create an empty one, make it
owned by DAEMON, and try the test again.  If the file is
still empty, then check the spelling of the full filename
of the gateway executable in /etc/inetd.conf.  If that
doesn't show what the problem is, check the inetd.conf file
to make sure that you've got 3 items after the full
filename of the executable.

If all of the items show up except for #3 & #4, then the
gateway was unable to contact the LOCALTI_SERVER at the
LOCALTI_PORT and get the main menu.  Check the spelling of
the domain name of the LOCALTI_SERVER.  Make sure that the
TechInfo server is up.

If it still doesn't work, send me email...


2. Statistics (optional)

The logfile contains useful information.  Once every month
or so, it'd be nice to have a summary of the usage of the
gateway.

I've written a csh script, stats, which computes the total
number of connections, and the number of UPENN and
non-UPENN connections.

Install the "stats" script somewhere, say
/usr/local/bin/gopher-ti-gw-stats, and run it to make sure
it works.

Once it works, add a line to crontab.  For example:
0 0 1 * * /usr/local/bin/gopher-ti-gw-stats /usr/local/logs/gopher-techinfo-gw | /usr/ucb/mail -s "Gopher-Techinfo GW Stats" root
#
# send the stats on the first of the month to root
#


3. The DEBUGLOG file needs to be erased on a regular basis.
   I wrote a script, called cleanuplog, which mails the log
   file to someone who cares if there are FatalErrors in
   the log, and then removes it.

   Running this script once a month is probably often
   enough.  Install the script.  Since the script is
   normally silent, you should check it once in a while to
   make sure that it actually ran.

