=========================================
APRIL 22: Technical Tutorials and Forums
----------------------------------------

Morning General Session
      8:00  Registration
      9:00  Welcome - Dr. D.R. Riley, Associate V.P. & Associate Provost, 
                      Academic Affairs, University of Minnesota

GEN1  9:10  Gopherspace & the State of the Gopher
            University of Minnesota Internet Gopher Development Team
A look at where we came from and where we are going. How Gopher fits 
together with other internet services, how Internet services will evolve
over the next year, new user interface metaphors for Gopher clients, and 
significant recent developments in Gopher technology. Meet the new,
improved U of M gopher development team.

     10:15  Break

GEN2 10:30  Searching Gopherspace with Veronica - Steve Foster 
How veronica has evolved in the last year. A fascinating rundown of the
numbers on the growth in GopherSpace, and a survey of the most-wanted words
in GopherSpace.  Steve Foster, co-creator of veronica, will discuss making
your gopher server veronica-friendly by using options to control indexing, 
and by using prebuilt index files. How ( and why ) to run and register your 
own veronica server. He will also discuss some future directions for veronica,
including plans for simplified regional and country indexes, and progress on
more-efficient servers. Finally, in BEYOND THE ABSTRACT  he will discuss  
possibilities for improved index capabilities using Gopher+ attributes.  

GEN3 11:15  Archie - Peter Deutsch
Archie isn't just for anonymous ftp anymore! The latest release
of the Archie system provides a fully supported service for indexing 
gopherspace. New features for this release include a direct gopher 
interface onto the entire archie system, as well as the new indexed 
collection of gopher menu items. In this presentation, Archie co-creator 
Peter Deutsch presents an overview of the Archie system architecture, 
details of the gopher gathering and distribution components, as well as 
a discussion of initial implementation experience. Also covered will be 
details on registering your site with archie, preparing prebuilt indexed 
files, as well as an overview and discussion of the Bunyip gang's future
plans for the furry rodent (yes, Bunyip is going to be doing Gopher+,
attributes and other stuff, too).  

     12:00   Lunch 


Afternoon tracks 1:30 - 4:30:

    Room 1: New Gopher Administrators
    ----------------------------------
NG1  1:30 - 1:50  Introduction to Gopher Protocol - Dave Johnson
A quick overview of the Gopher and Gopher+ protocols. The intended 
audience is new server administators who need to understand enough 
of the gopher protocol to test their servers and clients. 

NG2  1:50 - 2:15  Macintosh and DOS Servers - Dave Johnson
How to select hardware and software to set up a Gopher server 
running on a PC (PC-DOS) or a Macintosh (Macintosh OS). Full text 
searching on MacOS gopher servers.  

NG3  2:20 - 3:00  A Gopher Server for VMS: How to Cook your VMS 
                  Gopher Server - J. Lance Wilkinson          
History of the VMS Gopher Server, followed by a tutorial on 
installation of the VMS Gopher Server, version 1.2VMS-1, will 
be presented. The intended audience is VMS system managers who 
are about to, or have just become, GopherMeisters.

NG4  3:05 - 4:00  Unix Server and Client - Paul Lindner
Selecting hadware for running the Unix gopherd server. 
Configuring and installing gopherd and the Unix gopher clients.

NG5  4:00 - 4:30 Public Access Clients, Security Issues - Paul Lindner
How to set up a public access vt-100 telnet client while keeping the
cheese and crackers to a minimum. Security issues with running a Unix
gopher server.    

    Room 2: Enhancing Content, Efficiency, Reliability
    ---------------------------------------------------
EQ1     o   Information Quality - Anders Gillner 
EQ2     o   Making Sense of Veronica's Words - Nancy John
EQ3     o   Quality of Service - Mitra
The quality of information and organization of gopherspace is
crucial to providing users with a useful information system. In this
session, the quality and reliability issues of Gopher are discussed
from three perspectives. This session will look at conceptual models
for information quality/organization, how to give the users what they
want (and some ways of determining what users want and like) and
operational issues for making gopherspace more robust and reliable.
        
    Room 3: Developer Forum
    ------------------------
DEV1    An open forum discussion of gopher protocol and development 
        issues including:
            Gopher+ protocol document
            Attribute Registry
            New Data Types
            Gopher and URLs and URNs
        and a presentation called
            if (GView==Interactive_Image_Format) free (WWW); 
        by Alan Steremberg. This presentation covers the technology 
        behind Blue Skies, an interactive graphical gopher client. The 
        Interactive Image Format, a way of assigning hot regions to 
        graphics, will be discussed and proposed as the official GView 
        standard. Developers will receive sample IIF files, source code 
        to parse and manipulate IIF files and data structures, and 
        source code to decode GIF images. 



-----------------------------------
APRIL 23  Cool Gopher Applications
-----------------------------------
Morning tracks 9:00 - 12:00.

    Room 1: Cool Gopher Apps (Client, Server, and Service Show & Tell)
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
APP1   9:00- 9:30   WinSock Implementation of Asynchronous Gopher+ 
                    with multiple sessions in Super TCP - John Xu
A Windows Gopher+ client that supports asynchronous multiple sessions.

APP2   9:35-10:05   America Online's gateway to Gopher - 
                    GUI gopher at 2400 baud - Mitra
Pandora Systems has built an interface between AOL and the internet 
that allows AOL's users to access the resources available through WAIS 
and Gopher. Since AOL can be installed on a minimal machine, with a 
2400 baud modem with almost no documentation, this represents 
a huge step in making Gopher available to the non-technical population.

APP3  10:10-10:40   Gofer = Gopher+ + Token-based Tree Maintenance and  
                    Much More - Andrew Scherpbier and Mark Boyns
Would you like to maintain your gopher server with a gopher client? 
We will present the Gopher Maintenance Protocol (GMP) which allows 
users to maintain their own Gopher trees without intervention of a 
Gopher administrator. GMP consists of basic extensions to the Gopher+ protocol 
which we hope to be adopted in future versions of Gopher+.  
A brand new Gopher+/GMP client and server have been developed at 
SDSU in C++. This project, code named Gofer, has produced a 
high performance/low maintenance gopher implementation.

APP4  10:55-11:25 Gopher Access to Mainframe Based Administrative 
                  Data and Class Rosters - Robert Cademy
Do you have a lot of data on a mainframe that you want users to be 
able to access on their desktop workstations with tools they already 
have? Using Gopher+ Ask blocks that's just what we've done at SDSU.  
We import class roster information from our administrative mainframe 
onto a Unix server and allow faculty to request their rosters, via 
Gopher, in text or spreadsheet format, for Macintosh, PC, or other 
systems. Issues such as ease-of-use, format type, electronic delivery, 
and security will be discussed. 

APP5  11:30-12:00  The AskERIC Virtual Library: A User-Driven 
                   Service - Nancy Morgan
The AskERIC Service is a user-based approach to providing educational 
information services and resources through the Internet. The 
organization and development of resources for the AskERIC Virtual 
Library, a Gopher/FTP site of selected resources for education and 
general interest, is driven by the questions and comments received 
by users of AskERIC.
   

    Room 2: Even More Cool Gopher Apps
    ------------------------------------
APP6   9:00- 9:30  Using Minuet as a PC-DOS Gopher client 
                   - Earl Schleske
Minuet is an integrated client that supports Gopher+, Netnews, 
ftp, telnet, and SMTP/POP for e-mail. The most amazing part of 
Minuet is that this single applications runs on 512K PC-DOS 
systems. Sites that want to support internet access without
requiring user upgrades will want to consider Minuet.

APP7   9:35-10:05  Meet GINA - A face you will love at 
                   first sight - Keith Vogt
A Graphical Interface for Network Access designed for easy access 
to the Internet. A client/server interface for Mac/Windows that 
provides email, conferences (usnet groups), and information (ftp, 
telnet and gopher integrated) with easy point and click operation. 
Developed primarily for K-12 classroom use with usenet group 
selection capability.

APP8  10:10-10:40  Blue Skies Gopher - Alan Steremberg
Forecast: Blue Skies, chance of large rodents. Blue Skies is an 
interactive graphical gopher client and an extremely powerful 
data visualization tool. The University of Michigan Weather 
Underground gopher servers has interactive images which
allow the user to point at part of the image for further 
information. For example, selecting a city on a weather map would 
give the current conditions for that city. Blue Skies will also 
display quicktime quicktime animations, GIF and JPEG images, and
more. Server maintainers will learn how easy it is to create 
their own interactive images! 

APP9  10:55-11:25  WSGopher: a Windows Gopher+ client - David Brooks
WSGopher is an asynchronous, MDI Gopher+ client for Microsoft Windows 
and WinSock 1.1. To support the user, it uses WYSIWIH (what you see 
is what I have) and a full range of features including bookmark 
\categories, printing with screen or printer fonts, print preview, 
parallel TCP/IP connections, and much more. Come hear about this 
popular client from the author!

APP10 11:30-12:00  Gopher and the Mathematics Archives 
                   - Larry Husch & Earl Fife
The Mathematics Archives has as its goals as providing access to 
all software and other materials which are available on the Internet 
and which are useful in the teaching of mathematics at the community 
college, college and university levels. We will discuss how gopher 
has helped us in our attempt to reach these goals.


    Room 3: Gophers of a Different Color
    -------------------------------------
COL1   9:00- 9:30 K-12: Using Gopher as a Learning Resource 
                        Server - Matthew Stuve
The UIUC Learning Resource Server (located at lynx.ed.uiuc.edu)
was one of the first Gopher servers to address the needs of pre- 
and in-service teachers as well as K-12 schools in general. The 
relevant K-12 resources of the server will be demonstrated. In 
addition, our server is composed of resources provided by numerous 
staff, faculty, and students within the College from local K-12 
schools.  This form of "distributed server management" will be 
explained in the context of Macintosh file sharing on AppleTalk 
networks. Finally, guidance on the design, setup, and management
of Gopher servers in K-12 settings will be provided.

COL2 9:35-10:05   Service Learning Across the USA: Establishing 
                  a Service Learning Gopher - Charles Boudreaux
Service-learning has been a major focus of the Clinton administration. 
Our nationally-funded clearinghouse of K-12th grade service-learning 
information is shared with the public via toll-free telephone calls 
to our center, a FoxPro database containing information from the 
field, and an InterNet Gopher server running on a Macintosh platform.  
Our server will be demonstrated via Macintosh  TurboGopher and 
mainframe clients. As our server is still under construction, 
future directions and Macintosh Server foibles will also be 
discussed.

COL3  10:10-10:40  Building Gophers Collaboratively: Children, 
		   Youth and Family Information Servers
                   - Trudy Dunham and Robert Rubinyi
Sharing electronic publications, newsletters, and
information about successful programs in the areas of children,
youth and family is the focus of two Gopher information bases
developed by the Minnesota Extension Service.  Initiated in 1992,
the Minnesota Children, Youth and Family Consortium Electronic
Clearinghouse has grown to encompass a wide-range of materials
including census data, reports from nonprofit agencies, project
abstracts and online publications. The newly formed National
Extension Children, Youth and Family Network is a collaborative
effort of land grant universities in over forty five states to
share materials on child care, family resiliency, science and
technology education and interagency collaboration. During this
session, the planning, implementation and technical challenges
posed in the development of collaborative information systems
will be discussed.

COL4  10:55-11:25  Corporate Gophers: Schlumberger and its Information 
                   GopherSpace - Rich Obrecht
Schlumberger has begun to implement Gopher in such a way that it can 
distribute information across the corporation. Such information includes 
things such as how to acquire an IP subnet, getting a DECnet node number 
and name, telecommunications circuit acquisition, X.25 PSN Host and Line 
configuration request, and access account requests. This is by no means 
an exhaustive list and this list grows DAILY! Schlumberger is also 
pursuing securing information such that only a subset of employees may 
peruse the secure information (using Gshield). Standards have been defined 
for 1st and 2nd-level menus such that ALL Schlumberger Gopher servers 
have the same look and feel for the travelling employee. Indexing has 
been implemented for global Gopherspace searching (using Jughead) and 
specific server-based Gopherspace searching (WAIS and freeWAIS). 
Schlumberger is EXCITED about information distribution using Gopher!

12:00 Lunch 

Afternoon tracks 1:30 - 3:45

    Room 1: Still More Cool Gopher Apps 
    ------------------------------------
APP11  1:30- 2:00  Jughead: A tool to search menus in your local 
                   gopher menu space - Rhett "Jonzy" Jones
Besides the local search feature, Jughead is also an organizational tool 
allowing a hierarchical view of a gopher subspace.

APP12  2:05- 2:35  Running a Consolidated Gopher and WWW Server 
                   - Michael Potter
Los Alamos National Laboratory has developed a World-Wide-Web server 
that integrates nicely with an existing Gopher server. The WWW server 
allows access to information already stored in Gopher, and provides 
hooks to take full advantage of the features of WWW and hypertext.  
Organizations that wish to maintain information in a single form, but 
serve both Gopher and WWW users, should be interested in the LANL 
WWW server.

APP13  2:50- 3:20  Gopher Goes Interactive - embedding Usenet News 
                   in Gopher - Stephen Trier
An innovative MS-DOS Gopher client with integrated Usenet and a 
modified Unix gopher client that can link to Usenet. Both an
overview of the technolgy and a demonstration.

APP14  3:25- 3:55  Growing the MIT Libraries Gopher: subject 
                   classification and team building - Keith Morgan
Do all gophers look alike? Should all gophers look alike? Keith 
Morgan, Economics Subject Specialist and member of the MIT Libraries 
Gopher Team will discuss the subject classification and team building
approach taken by the MIT Libraries gopher team. Morgan will 
demonstrate MITosis, the Libraries gopher, and suggest methods by 
which gopher builders might form collaborative alliances that draw on
the particular professional knowledge of librarians: an understanding 
of how people search for information and how best to organize that 
information. The MIT Libraries have employed a team approach to the
gopher that has united the organizational skills of cataloging librarians 
and the evaluative and specialized knowledge of subject selectors with 
the technical expertise of the systems office. Morgan will also share the 
gopher team's "Guiding Principles for a Good Gopher" developed over the 
past year.

  
    Room 2: Gophers of a Different Color (continued from morning session)
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
COL5  1:30- 2:00  Library and Government Information via Gophers 
                  Using LC MARVEL - Elizabeth Miller
LC MARVEL (Library of Congress Machine-Assisted Realization of the 
Virtual Electronic Library) can be classified as both a "library" 
and "government" gopher server.  In addition to the Library's own 
information, LC MARVEL also offers easy and well-organized access 
to government information (federal, state, international, 
congressional, etc.) and to library information, online catalogs,
and library gophers.  This demonstration will focus on using the 
LC MARVEL gopher to access to this genre of information over the 
Internet.

COL6  2:05- 2:35   Legi-Slate: Burrowing into the House and Senate
                   - Ed Stawick
Legi-Slate, Inc. has designed a new Gopher server to deliver information 
about the daily activities of the Executive and Legislative branches of 
the U.S. government. This system has features not found in other gophers and
uses these features in an attempt to deliver this complex information in a 
straightforward manner. The Legi-Slate Gopher System is designed to target the 
academic market although a lot of interest is being shown by government and 
corporate entities. This session will introduce the Legi-Slate Gopher Service, 
discuss the unique features of the system and demonstrate the currently 
available prototype.

    Room 2: Server Tools and Maintenance
    -------------------------------------
STM1   2:50- 3:20  UNIX Server Construction and Maintenance for 
                   Mac Users - Michael Fraase
You don't need to know much about UNIX to construct and maintain a 
UNIX-based Gopher server. This session is geared for Mac (or Microsoft Windows) 
users with little or no UNIX experience who find themselves maintaining a 
UNIX-based Gopher server. The good news is that you can 
use familiar Mac (or Microsoft Windows) tools with a graphical 
interface. You need not be burdened with the UNIX command prompt.

STM2   3:25- 3:55  Titling Menus with scripts and keystrokes (or 
                   how to work with .names files and .cap directories) 
                   - Paul Kramer
This presentation introduces a program that helps manage 
..names files and .cap directories in a Unix gopher server. These 
files/directories are used to title entries in the gopher server. 
A public domain program called utree can be used to create, 
edit, and manage these files and directories. utree is a 
screen-oriented file system browser and file management utility 
written by Peter Klingebiel. While running utree, the user can use 
single keystroke commands and define new commands to perform tasks
specific to managing the .names files and/or .cap directories. 
These features will be demonstrated in this presentation.

    Room 3: Advanced Server Tools and Gateways
    -------------------------------------------
ADV1   1:30- 2:00  Gopher to SQL Gateway - Paul Lindner
SQL databases have an explicit heirarchical structure than can be 
mapped into Gopherspace very naturally. This sessions covers the
Gopher to SQL gateway for Oracle and Sybase SQL servers, and 
demonstrates browsing, searching, and modifying SQL database from 
Gopher+ clients.

ADV2   2:05- 2:35  Gopher to Z39.50 1992 gateway - Danny Iacovou
While Gopher has had a gateway to WAIS (an extension of the 1988 
revision of Z39.50) for several years, Z39.50 has not been standing 
still. The new 1992 revision of Z39.50 requires a new gopher gateway 
and this allows for access to online catalogs. This session 
covers the features of the gopher to 1992 Z39.50 gateway, how to 
install and configure your own gateway, and a tour of some of the 
library catalogs that are now accessible via Gopher.

ADV3   2:50- 3:20  Current Contents database on Gopher - Bob Alberti
The Current Contents database is a set of abstracts for academic 
journals which is updated weekly. Current Contents is quite popular 
at the University of Minnesota since it is easily searchable via 
gopher and is an excellent way to scan journals for articles of 
interest. The processes used to automate gopherizing the raw Current 
Contents data is an excellent case study for gopher administrators 
pondering how to publish masses of frequently changing information.
This session covers both the userUs view of Current Contents and the 
system administration issues.

ADV4   3:25- 3:55  Authentication & X.500 gopher gateway - Frank Grewe
The University of MinnesotaUs online directory is an X.500 directory 
which contains over 100,000 entries. Faculty, staff, and students can
use Gopher+ clients to change their entries in the X.500 database as 
well as browse and search X.500. This session explores how Gopher+ 
forms and a gopher to X.500 gateway make it possible to update 
preferred e-mail address, fax number, etc. in the directory.


------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the scheduled sessions, rooms are available for informal 
Birds-Of-a-Feather (BOF) sessions all day Saturday. BOF signups wil be 
held during day 1 (Friday).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
