README                                                      13 June 95
                                                         Keith Andrews


Harmony is Copyright (c) by IICM, see the full COPYRIGHT notice for
conditions of use.




	      Harmony -- The Unix/X11 Client for Hyper-G
	      ------------------------------------------


  Thank you for your interest in Harmony. Harmony is the Unix/X11
client for Hyper-G, the first "second generation", publicly available,
networked hypermedia information system running over the
Internet. Hyper-G integrates hyperlinking, hierarchical structuring,
sophisticated search, and access control facilities into one single
system, and is interoperable with other network information tools like
Gopher and WWW. Hyper-G is being developed jointly by the Institute
for Information Processing and Computer Supported New Media (IICM) of
Graz University of Technology, Austria and the Institute for
HyperMedia Systems (IHM) of JOANNEUM RESEARCH, Graz, Austria.


The latest release of Harmony is available by anonymous ftp from:

  ftp://ftp.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/pub/Hyper-G/Harmony


The Harmony FAQ (Frequently Answered Questions) contains pointers to
further information about Harmony and Hyper-G and an up-to-date list
of FTP mirror sites. It is available at:

  ftp://ftp.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/pub/Hyper-G/Harmony/harmony.faq




Harmony Features
----------------


o Hierarchical Browsing

  Harmony's Collection Browser displays the hierarchical membership
  structure of Hyper-G data, like a graphical file browser.


o Search

  Harmony supports both attribute (keyword, title, author, creation
  time, etc.) and content (full text) searches; search results are
  presented as a ranked list. The scope of searches is user-definable,
  ranging from individual collections to all collections on all
  Hyper-G servers world-wide.


o Hyperlinks

  Harmony supports hyperlinks between arbitrary document types,
  including text, image, film, PostScript, and 3D models. Source and
  destination anchors can be defined interactively.


o Local Map

  Harmony's Local Map presents a dynamically generated graphical
  overview of the link relationships of a chosen document: *both*
  incoming and outgoing hyperlinks are represented. Selecting an
  object toward the edge of the map and generating a new display
  offers a new means of associative browsing.


o Location Feedback

  Selecting a document or collection in the local map, in the search
  result list, or following a hyperlink, causes the location of the
  corresponding object to be *automatically* displayed in the
  collection browser, providing a powerful aid to orientation.
  

o History

  The History Browser offers a timeline of past interactive waypoints,
  including previous search panels.


o 3D Information Landscape

  The Information Landscape is a three-dimensional graphical overview
  map of the collection structure. Users can "fly" over the hyperspace
  landscape looking for salient features, select interesting
  documents, etc. This feature requires platform support for IrisGL or
  OpenGL and is currently only available for SGI and DEC Alpha
  machines.


o Multilinguality

  Harmony's user interface adjusts dynamically to the language of
  first choice, documents available in multiple languages are selected
  in order of language preference, and searches are optionally
  language-dependent.





Document Viewers
----------------

  Documents in Harmony are displayed by separate viewer processes in
windows of their own:


o Text

  A generic SGML parser is used to display Hyper-G (HTF) and WWW
  (HTML) texts. Inline images in GIF, JPEG, and TIFF formats are
  supported.


o Image

  GIF, JPEG, and TIFF images are supported and may be zoomed, panned,
  etc. A special feature is live display -- when turned on, images are
  built up progressively on-screen as they are loaded. The autofit
  option automatically scales images to fit the current image viewer
  window.


o Film

  MPEG-1 video streams are supported. Options include live display
  while loading, double size display, alternative dithering methods,
  and gamma correction. After loading, selective portions of the film
  may be replayed, the frame rate altered, etc.


o Audio

  The Audio Player supports both the Network Audio System (NAS) and
  local audio commands provided on your system.


o PostScript

  PostScript files can be displayed page by page, zoomed, printed,
  etc.


o 3D Scene

  3D model descriptions are displayed and can be manipulated or
  traversed in three dimensions. Hyperlinks are attached to objects in
  the model. This feature requires platform support for IrisGL or
  OpenGL and is currently only available for SGI and DEC Alpha
  machines.



  *All* native Harmony viewers support both activation and interactive
definition of incoming and outgoing hyperlinks. Harmony can be
configured to use external programs to display any document type (but
without linking capabilities).





User Configuration
------------------

  Most features of Harmony can be configured by X resources, and many
of them interactively as well. We are working on a mechanism for
writing interactive configurations to a file and hence saving them
between Harmony sessions automatically (currently you have to enter
them into your ~/.Xdefaults file by hand).





Upcoming Features
-----------------

o Annotations.

o Better link manipulation and editing for existing links.

o A drag-and-drop file browser facility for uploading documents.

o Drag-and-drop manipulation of the collection hierarchy.

o Image editing via the Image Viewer.

o Integrated electronic mail facilities.

o 3D visualisation of link relationships and search results.

o Interactive forms.

o A Vector Graphics viewer.

o Online help.
