Using Gopher as a Learning Resource Server

Presentation Overview
GopherCon 1994

Matthew J. Stuve
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 


Abstract

The UIUC Learning Resource Server (located at lynx.ed.uiuc.edu) contains 
information related to the instructional, research, and service missions 
of the College of Education. The server runs on a Macintosh computer 
using the University of Minnesota's GopherSurfer software. It was one of 
the first Gopher servers to address the needs of pre- and in-service 
teachers as well as K-12 schools in general. The relevant K-12 resources 
of the server will be demonstrated. In addition, our server is composed 
of resources provided by numerous staff, faculty, and students within 
the College from local K-12 schools. This form of "distributed server 
management" will be explained in the context of Macintosh file sharing 
on AppleTalk networks. Finally, guidance on the design, setup, and 
management of Gopher servers in K-12 settings will be provided. 


What is a Learning Resource Server?

A Learning Resource Server (LRS) is a repository of information 
pertaining to teaching and learning.  That information can come in many 
forms, such as text, images, sounds, databases, and links to other 
relevant servers.  An LRS can be thought of as a "window" on a community 
of teachers and learners.  Our Learning Resource Server represents the 
realization of a suite of desktop server technologies that are feasible 
and scalable in a K-12 environment.


How does the UIUC LRS serve and represent K-12 teachers and students?

In addition to the practical functions a Gopher server can provide a 
school district, virtual communities of teachers can set in motion 
powerful learning activities that make use of networked resources.  Kids 
can share the artifacts of their learning with their peers from other 
countries and cultures.  Teachers and College faculty and can pool 
relevant materials on a university-run server.


Distributing server responsibilities on a "composite desktop server"

The UIUC LRS represents a community of teacher educators, graduate 
students, administrators, in-service and pre-service teachers, and K-12 
students.  We have enabled access to the server via AppleShare and other 
server technologies so that files can be added and deleted remotely 
without always having to go through a single system administrator.  


Creating K-12 Gopher servers

The Macintosh provides and easy to use operating system upon which 
teachers and administrators can create their own information server.  
They can decide what resources are important for their intended 
audience.


For more information, contact:

Address:	Office of Teaching TeleAppreticeships
		Department of Educational Psychology
		1310 S. Sixth St.
		Champaign, IL  61820-6990
Phone:	(217) 244-7005
E-mail:	mstuve@uiuc.edu

Documents from this presentation are available on the UIUC Learning 
Resource Server.  Connect via Gopher to lynx.ed.uiuc.edu.  The Teaching 
TeleApprenticeships project is supported by National Science Foundation 
grant no. RED-9253423
