This directory contains the lab-optimized version of POPmail for
Macintosh in file Macintosh_POPmail_Lab.hqx.  The current
version is 1.2. It is MIME aware, PowerPC native on PowerMacs,
and runs on all Macs with System 6.0.7 or better.
POPmail/Lab requires MacTCP or Open Transport.

The Lab version of POPmail is a simple POP3 e-mail client optimized 
for use in computer labs and on kiosks. Here the idea is that roaming 
users (people on a shared machine in a lab or at a kiosk) should be able 
to read and compose mail without necessarily removing mail from the 
POP server and permanently storing it on the computer they are using. 
Since you can read mail without moving it off the mail server, you do 
not need to carry a floppy disk to keep a copy of your e-mail. Any mail 
you have not deleted remains on the mail server. Because POPmail/Lab 
was designed for computer labs and kiosks, the user interface was kept 
as simple as possible so that there is minimal training required.

When you launch POPmail/Lab, you are prompted to enter your name, 
e-mail account, and password. POPmail/Lab then displays a copy of all 
the mail in the user's account on their POP3 server. If you delete any 
messages during your session, POPmail/Lab notes this and instructs 
the mail server to delete these messages the next time the you fetch 
mail (or when you quit the program). 

Computer lab administrators who need to customize POPmail/Lab to
initially display example usernames, change URL helper applications,
change (or disable) Directory Lookup via the Ph application, 
add a special smtp gateway, etc. should send email to
popmail@boombox.micro.umn.edu requesting this information.
The Ph application may be found in the Ph1.2 subdirectory,
or via anonymous ftp from ftp.acns.nwu.edu.

POPmail/Lab is available for both Macintosh and Windows. To use 
POPmail/Lab on the Macintosh, you will need an network connection
and Apple's MacTCP software. POPmail/Lab for Windows runs on both 
Windows 3.11 and Windows 95 and requires a network connection and 
Winsock network software.


Please send any comments or bug reports to:
     popmail@boombox.micro.umn.edu


